---
title: Abstract Duality in Optimization (Part III)
date: 2022-07-15
tags: 
  - mathematics
  - optimization
  - convex analysis
use_math: true
---

**Difficulty**: Experts & Advanced Graduate Students

We now look at some specialized applications of our previous results. This particular post covers the general framework of Rockafellar and Fenchel and derives the classic Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions of Arrow and Hurwicz. 

## Coupled Composite Functions  

Consider the specialization 

$$\begin{aligned}
F(u) & :=J(u,Au),\\
\Phi(u,p) & :=J(u,Au-p),\end{aligned}$$ 

where $J$ is a function of $V\times Y$ into $\overline{\mathbb{R}}$ and $A$ is a linear operator. It is straightforward to show that 

$$\Phi^{*}(0,p^{*})=J^{*}(A^{*}p^{*},-p^{*})$$

where $A^{\*}$ is the adjoint of $A$. Furthermore, if $J$ is convex (resp. in $\Gamma_{0}(V\times Y)$) then $\Phi$ is convex (resp. in $\Gamma_{0}(V\times Y)$).

**Remark V.1.** The Lagrangian associated with this specialization is 

$$L(u,p^{*})=J_{u}^{*}(-p^{*})-\left\langle p^{*},Au\right\rangle$$ 

where $J_{u}$ is the function $p\mapsto J(u,p)$ and $J_{u}^{\*}$ is its conjugate function.

The next result specializes the extremality conditions in part III.

**Proposition V.2.** *The following statements are equivalent:*

1.  *$\bar{u}$ is a solution of ${\cal P}$, $\bar{p}^{\*}$ is a solution of ${\cal P}^{\*}$, and $\inf\ {\cal P}=\sup\ {\cal P}^{\*}$.*

2.  *$J(\bar{u},A\bar{u})+J^{\*}(A^{\*}\bar{p}^{\*},-\bar{p}^{\*})=0$.*

3.  *$(A^{\*}\bar{p}^{\*},-\bar{p})\in\partial J(\bar{u},A\bar{u})$.*

## Decoupled Conjugate Functions  

Let us further specialize $J$ as $$J(u,Au)=G(u)+H(Au).$$ It is easy to verify that 

$$\begin{aligned}
J^{*}(u^{*},p^{*}) & =G^{*}(u^{*})+H^{*}(p^{*}),\\
{\cal P}^{*} & \equiv\sup_{p^{*}\in Y^{*}}\left\{ -G^{*}(A^{*}p^{*})-H^{*}(-p^{*})\right\} .\end{aligned}$$ 

Furthermore, if $G$ and $H$ are convex (resp. convex and proper lower semicontinuous) then $J$ is convex (resp. convex and proper lower semicontinuous).

**Remark V.3.** The extremality conditions for strong duality of ${\cal P}$ can be simplified to 

$$\begin{aligned}
G(\bar{u})+G^{*}(A^{*}\bar{p}^{*})-\left\langle A^{*}\bar{p}^{*},\bar{u}\right\rangle  & =0,\\
H(A\bar{u})+H^{*}(-\bar{p}^{*})+\left\langle \bar{p}^{*},A\bar{u}\right\rangle  & =0,\end{aligned}$$ 

or equivalently, 

$$\begin{aligned}
A^{*}\bar{p}^{*} & \in\partial G(\bar{u}),\\
-\bar{p}^{*} & \in\partial H(A\bar{u}).\end{aligned}$$

**Remark V.4.** When $Y=\prod_{i=1}^{m}Y_{i}$ and $Y^{\*}=\prod_{i=1}^{m}Y_{i}^{\*}$ then the extremality conditions for $H$ can be further decoupled into 

$$H_{i}(A_{i}\bar{u})+H_{i}^{*}(-\bar{p}_{i}^{*})+\left\langle \bar{p}_{i}^{*},A_{i}\bar{u}\right\rangle =0,$$ 

and 

$$-\bar{p}_{i}^{*}\in\partial H_{i}(A_{i}\bar{u})$$ 

for $i=1,\ldots,m$.

## Cone-Constrained Programming 

We first derive some results for general cone-convex constraint functions.

Let ${\cal C}\subseteq V$ be nonempty closed convex, let $J:V\mapsto\overline{\mathbb{R}}$ be convex and lower semicontinuous with domain ${\cal C}$, and let ${\cal K}\subseteq Y$ to be a closed convex cone with partial ordering $\leq$ and polar cone ${\cal K}^{\*}$.

Furthermore, let $B:{\cal C}\mapsto Y$ be a (possibly nonlinear) mapping such that

-   $B$ is ${\cal K}$-convex on ${\cal C}$, i.e., $B(\lambda u+[1-\lambda]v)\leq\lambda B(u)+(1-\lambda)B(v)$ for every $u,v\in{\cal C}$ and $\lambda\in(0,1)$.

-   For every $p^{\*}\in Y^{\*}$ where $p^{*}\geq0$, the mapping $u\mapsto\left\langle p^{\*},B(u)\right\rangle$ of ${\cal C}$ into $\mathbb{R}$ is lower semicontinuous.

-   $\{u\in{\cal C}:B(u)\leq0\}\neq\emptyset$.

Denoting $\delta_{\{\cal F\}_{p}}(u)$ to be the indicator function 

$$\delta_{\{\cal F\}_{p}}(u):=\begin{cases}
0, & u\in{\cal C}\text{ and }B(u)\leq p,\\
+\infty, & \text{otherwise},
\end{cases}$$ 

of the set ${\cal F}_{p}:=\{u\in V:u\in{\cal C},\ B(u)\leq p\}$, we are interested in the specialization 

$$\begin{aligned}
F(u) & :=J(u)+\delta_{\{\cal F\}_{0}}(u),\\
\Phi(u,p) & :=J(u)+\delta_{\{\cal F\}_{p}}(u).\end{aligned}$$ 

Some basic properties of $\Phi$ and ${\cal F}_{p}$ are as follows.

**Proposition VI.1.** *$\Phi\in\Gamma(V\times Y)$ and ${\cal F}_{p}$ is closed and convex in $V$ for every $p\in Y$. Moreover, the set ${\cal F}=\{(u,p)\in V\times Y:u\in{\cal C},\ B(u)\leq p\}$ is closed convex in $V\times Y$.*

**Remark VI.2.** The Lagrangian $L$ of ${\cal P}$ is given by 

$$L(u,p^{*})=J(u)-\left\langle p^{*},B(u)\right\rangle \overset{\cdot}{-}\delta_{\{\cal K\}^{*}}(-p^{*})$$ 

where addition and subtraction in $\overline{\mathbb{R}}$ are given by 

$$\begin{aligned}
(+\infty)\overset{\cdot}{+}(-\infty) & =(+\infty)\overset{\cdot}{-}(+\infty)=+\infty,\\
(+\infty)+(-\infty) & =(+\infty)\underset{\cdot}{-}(+\infty)=-\infty.\end{aligned}$$

The next result gives a sufficient condition for the stability of ${\cal P}$. It is often called the *constraint qualification hypothesis* or *Slater's condition*.

**Proposition VI.3.** *Suppose $\inf\ {\cal P}$ is finite and there exists $u_{0}\in{\cal C}$ such that $B(u_{0})<0$, i.e., $-B(u_{0})\in{\rm int}\ {\cal K}=$ the interior of ${\cal K}$. Then, ${\cal P}$ is stable.*

## Convex Programming 

Let us now specialize the previous results to convex programming and, subsequently, derive the classic KKT conditions. Suppose $V=V^{\*}=\mathbb{R}^{n}$, $Y=Y^{\*}=\mathbb{R}^{m}$, and ${\cal K}$ equal to the nonnegative orthant ${\mathbb{R}}\_{+}^{m}$. Moreover, suppose $B$ is defined by its components $B_{1},\ldots,B_{m}:{\cal C}\mapsto\mathbb{R}$ which are assumed to be convex and lower semicontinuous.

The specialization of Slater's condition reads: $\inf\ {\cal P}$ is finite and there exists $u_{0}\in{\cal C}$ such that $B_{i}(u_{0})$ for $i=1,\ldots,m$. On the other hand, the specialization of the Lagrangian is of the form $$L(u,p)=J(u)-\sum_{i=1}^{m}p_{i}B_{i}(u)$$ for $p\leq0$ and $u\in{\cal C}$.

We now finish with the Kuhn-Tucker Theorem, and the associated KKT conditions.

**Theorem VI.4.** *The point $\bar{u}\in{\cal C}$ is a solution of ${\cal P}$ if and only if there exists $\bar{p}\in\mathbb{R}^{m}$ such that $\bar{p}\leq0$ and*

$$L(\bar{u},p)\leq L(\bar{u},\bar{p})\leq L(u,\bar{p})$$ 

*for every $u\in{\cal C}$ and $p\geq0$. In this case, $\sum_{i=1}^{m}\langle\bar{p}_{i},B_{i}(\bar{u})\rangle=0$ which implies that for every $i=1,\ldots,m$ we have*

$$\begin{cases}
\text{either }B_{i}(\bar{u})<0\text{ and }\bar{p}_{i}=0,\\
\text{or }B_{i}(\bar{u})=0\text{ and }\bar{p}_{i}\leq0.
\end{cases}$$
