---
title: Abstract Duality in Optimization (Part VI)
author: William Kong
description: Note about abstract duality in optimization.
tags: mathematics, optimization, convex analysis
---

**Difficulty**: Experts & Advanced Graduate Students

This post derives the classic Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions of Arrow and Hurwicz. It is assumed that the reader is familiar with the notation in parts I--V of this series.

## Cone-Constrained Programming 

We first derive some results for general cone-convex constraint functions.

Let ${\cal C}\subseteq V$ be nonempty closed convex, let $J:V\mapsto\overline{\mathbb{R}}$ be convex and lower semicontinuous with domain ${\cal C}$, and let ${\cal K}\subseteq Y$ to be a closed convex cone with partial ordering $\leq$ and polar cone ${\cal K}^{*}$.

Furthermore, let $B:{\cal C}\mapsto Y$ be a (possibly nonlinear) mapping such that

-   $B$ is ${\cal K}$-convex on ${\cal C}$, i.e., $B(\lambda u+[1-\lambda]v)\leq\lambda B(u)+(1-\lambda)B(v)$ for every $u,v\in{\cal C}$ and $\lambda\in(0,1)$.

-   For every $p^{*}\in Y^{*}$ where $p^{*}\geq0$, the mapping $u\mapsto\left\langle p^{*},B(u)\right\rangle$ of ${\cal C}$ into $\mathbb{R}$ is lower semicontinuous.

-   $\{u\in{\cal C}:B(u)\leq0\}\neq\emptyset$.

Denoting $\delta_{{\cal F}_{p}}(u)$ to be the indicator function $$\delta_{{\cal F}_{p}}(u):=\begin{cases}
0, & u\in{\cal C}\text{ and }B(u)\leq p,\\
+\infty, & \text{otherwise},
\end{cases}$$ of the set ${\cal F}_{p}:=\{u\in V:u\in{\cal C},\ B(u)\leq p\}$, we are interested in the specialization $$\begin{aligned}
F(u) & :=J(u)+\delta_{{\cal F}_{0}}(u),\\
\Phi(u,p) & :=J(u)+\delta_{{\cal F}_{p}}(u).\end{aligned}$$ Some basic properties of $\Phi$ and ${\cal F}_{p}$ are as follows.

**Proposition VI.1.** $\Phi\in\Gamma(V\times Y)$ and ${\cal F}_{p}$ is closed and convex in $V$ for every $p\in Y$. Moreover, the set ${\cal F}=\{(u,p)\in V\times Y:u\in{\cal C},\ B(u)\leq p\}$ is closed convex in $V\times Y$.

**Remark VI.2.** The Lagrangian $L$ of ${\cal P}$ is given by $$L(u,p^{*})=J(u)-\left\langle p^{*},B(u)\right\rangle \overset{\cdot}{-}\delta_{{\cal K}^{*}}(-p^{*})$$ where addition and subtraction in $\overline{\mathbb{R}}$ are given by $$\begin{aligned}
(+\infty)\overset{\cdot}{+}(-\infty) & =(+\infty)\overset{\cdot}{-}(+\infty)=+\infty,\\
(+\infty)+(-\infty) & =(+\infty)\underset{\cdot}{-}(+\infty)=-\infty.\end{aligned}$$

The next result gives a sufficient condition for the stability of ${\cal P}$. It is often called the *constraint qualification hypothesis* or *Slater's condition*.

**Proposition VI.3.** Suppose $\inf\ {\cal P}$ is finite and there exists $u_{0}\in{\cal C}$ such that $B(u_{0})<0$, i.e., $-B(u_{0})\in{\rm int}\ {\cal K}=$ the interior of ${\cal K}$. Then, ${\cal P}$ is stable.

## Convex Programming 

Let us now specialize the previous results to convex programming and, subsequently, derive the classic KKT conditions. Suppose $V=V^{*}=\mathbb{R}^{n}$, $Y=Y^{*}=\mathbb{R}^{m}$, and ${\cal K}=\mathbb{R}_{+}^{m}=$ the nonnegative orthant. Moreover, suppose $B$ is defined by its components $B_{1},\ldots,B_{m}:{\cal C}\mapsto\mathbb{R}$ which are assumed to be convex and lower semicontinuous.

The specialization of Slater's condition reads: $\inf\ {\cal P}$ is finite and there exists $u_{0}\in{\cal C}$ such that $B_{i}(u_{0})$ for $i=1,\ldots,m$. On the other hand, the specialization of the Lagrangian is of the form $$L(u,p)=J(u)-\sum_{i=1}^{m}p_{i}B_{i}(u)$$ for $p\leq0$ and $u\in{\cal C}$.

We now finish with the Kuhn-Tucker Theorem, and the associated KKT conditions.

**Theorem VI.4.** The point $\bar{u}\in{\cal C}$ is a solution of ${\cal P}$ if and only if there exists $\bar{p}\in\mathbb{R}^{m}$ such that $\bar{p}\leq0$ and $$L(\bar{u},p)\leq L(\bar{u},\bar{p})\leq L(u,\bar{p})$$ for every $u\in{\cal C}$ and $p\geq0$. In this case, $\sum_{i=1}^{m}\langle\bar{p}_{i},B_{i}(\bar{u})\rangle=0$ which implies that for every $i=1,\ldots,m$ we have $$\begin{cases}
\text{either }B_{i}(\bar{u})<0\text{ and }\bar{p}_{i}=0,\\
\text{or }B_{i}(\bar{u})=0\text{ and }\bar{p}_{i}\leq0.
\end{cases}$$
